PLANNER-1916 ConstraintStreams article + consistent tags (#218)
kiegroup/optaplanner-website: blog/2020-04-07-ModernJavaConstraintsNoDRL.adoc

> = Modern java constraints (no Drools Rule Language) - ConstraintStreams

Reviewer: How about `Constraint Streams: Modern Java constraints without the Drools Rule Language`.

To me, this reads better and in a more logical way.
Also, I believe that `Java` is capitalized and the entire documentation uses `Constraint Streams` as two words. I too prefer it that way.

:page-interpolate: true
:awestruct-author: ge0ffrey
:awestruct-layout: blogPostBase
:awestruct-tags: [feature, coding, constraint]
:awestruct-share_image_filename: constraintStreamGroupBy.png

Traditionally, to scale out with https://www.optaplanner.org/[OptaPlanner],
you had to learn DRL. _No more._

> With the new _ConstraintsStreams_ API, inspired Java 8 Streams and SQL,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the new _Constraints Streams_ API, inspired by Java 8 Streams and SQL,
```

you can now *write your constraints in Java* (or Kotlin or Scala)
and still benefit from incremental calculation.

> Underneath, ConstraintsStreams (CS) still use the powerful https://www.drools.org/[Drools] engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Underneath, Constraints Streams (CS) still use the powerful https://www.drools.org/[Drools] engine.
```

> We also still fully support score DRL's too. They are _not_ deprecated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also still fully support score DRLs too. They are _not_ deprecated.
```

Let's start with an example.
In nurse rostering, to avoid assigning shifts to employee `Ann`,
you would write this constraint in DRL:

[source,drl]
----
rule "Don't assign Ann"
    when

>         Shift(getEmployee().getName() == "Ann")

Reviewer: Actually, in DRL, you'd probably just write `Shift(employee.name == "Ann")`.

Author: Yes, but I discuss that later, so here I just used the java form.
Actually, "employee.name" doesn't work well, as employee is null when an entity is initialized and it throws wierd NPE's.

Author: Leaving this as is

    then
        scoreHolder.addSoftConstraintMatch(kcontext, -1);
end
----

This is the same constraint in Java using ConstraintStreams:

[source,java]
----
Constraint constraint = constraintFactory
        .from(Shift.class)
        .filter(shift -> shift.getEmployee().getName().equals("Ann"))
        .penalize("Don't assign Ann", HardSoftScore.ONE_SOFT);
----

If you're familiar with SQL or Java 8 streams, this should look familiar.
Given a potential solution with four shifts (two of which are assigned to `Ann`),

> those shifts through it flow like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
those shifts flow through the Constraint Stream like this:
```

image::constraintStreamFilter_part.png[]

This new approach to writing constraints has several benefits:

== Incremental calculation

First off, unlike an `EasyScoreCalculator`,

> ConstraintStreams still applies incremental score calculation to scale out, just like DRL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Constraint Streams still apply incremental score calculation to scale out, just like DRL.
```

For example, when a move swaps the employee of two shifts, only the delta is calculated.
That's a huge scalability gain:

image::constraintStreamIncrementalCalculation.png[]

== Indexing

When joining multiple types, just like an SQL `JOIN` operator,

> ConstraintStreams applies hash lookups on indexes to scale better:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Constraint Streams apply hash lookups on indexes to scale better:
```

image::constraintStreamJoinWithJoiners.png[]

== IDE support

> Because ConstraintsStreams are written in the Java language,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because Constraints Streams are written in the Java language,
```

they piggy-back on very strong tooling support.

Code highlighting, code completion and debugging just work:

=== Code highlighting

DRL code in IntelliJ IDEA Ultimate:

image::codeHighlightingDRL.png[]

> Java code using ConstraintStreams in IntelliJ IDEA Ultimate, for the same constraints:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Java code using Constraint Streams in IntelliJ IDEA Ultimate, for the same constraints:
```

Reviewer: Personally, I wouldn't use `Ultimate` - many people won't have that. CS works the exact same way in the standard IDEA, and people should know that.

Author: Community doesn't have DRL support

image::codeHighlightingConstraintStreams.png[]

=== Code completion

> Code completion for ConstraintStreams:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Code completion for Constraint Streams:
```

image::codeCompletionConstraintStreams.png[]

Of course, all API methods have Javadocs.

=== Debugging

> Add a breakpoint in ConstraintStream's `filter()`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a breakpoint in Constraint Stream's `filter()`:
```

image::codeDebuggingConstraintStreams1.png[]

To diagnose issues while debugging:

image::codeDebuggingConstraintStreams2.png[]

== Java syntax

> Constraints written in Java with ConstraintStreams follow the Java Language Specification (JLS), for good or bad.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Constraints written in Java with Constraint Streams follow the Java Language Specification (JLS), for good or bad.
```

> Similar logic applies when using ConstraintStreams from Kotlin or Scala.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar logic applies when using Constraint Streams from Kotlin or Scala.
```

> When migrating between DRL and ConstraintStreams, be aware of some differences between DRL and Java:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When migrating between DRL and Constraint Streams, be aware of some differences between DRL and Java:
```

* A DRL's `==` operator translates  to `equals()` in Java.
* Besides getters, DRL also allows MVEL expressions that translate into getters in Java.

For example, this DRL has `name` and `==`:

[source,drl]
----
rule "Don't assign Ann"
    when
        Employee(name == "Ann")
    then ...
end
----

But the Java variant for the exact same constraint has `getName()` and `equals()` instead:

[source,java]
----
constraintFactory.from(Employee.class)
        .filter(employee -> employee.getName().equals("Ann"))
        .penalize("Don't assign Ann", ...);
----

== Advanced functions

> The ConstraintStreams API allows us to add syntactic sugar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Constraint Streams API allows us to add syntactic sugar
```

and powerful new concepts, specifically tailored to help you build complex constraints.

Just to highlight one of these, let's take a look at the powerful `groupBy` method:

image::constraintStreamGroupBy.png[]

Similar to an SQL `GROUP BY` operator or a Java 8 Stream `Collector`,
it support `sum()`, `count()`, `countDistinct()`, `min()`, `max()`, `toList()`
and even custom functions, again without loss of incremental score calculation.

> == Future work for ConstraintStreams

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Future work for Constraint Streams
```

> First off, a big thanks to Lukáš Petrovický for all his work on ConstraintsStreams!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First off, a big thanks to https://github.com/triceo[Lukáš Petrovický]
 for all his work on Constraints Streams!
```

But this is just the beginning.
We envision more advanced functions,
such as load balancing/fairness methods
to make such constraints easier to implement.

Right now, our first priority is to make it easier to unit test constraints in isolation.

> Think TDD (Test Driven Design). Stay tuned!

Reviewer: Personally, I don't see the point of using the abbreviation, if all you do is then explain it in the same sentence. :-) Pick one.
